---
layout: post
title:  "Static site generators"
page.date:   2015-11-07 00:04:49
page.url: 2015-11-13-static-site-generators.html
page.id: 2015-11-13-static-site-generators
page.categories: ['work', 'code']
page.comments: true
---



The question to discuss in this blog post is, what do I think of static site generators and for what projects are
they suitable for.

This will be a short blogpost, because the topic is fairly clear cut and it is almost
always easy for my nature to confess what I know and what I don't know.
 
 The threshold to set-up a blog is very high, it is not even
comparable with respect to  Wordpress or Joomla. The slogan  "blog like a hacker" is not for nothing. If you want have something that simply 
separates your older posts to a different page other than the index.html, you have to do some Ruby using the Liquid template.
If you like to try and test, it might give you some satisfaction, but I am of a completely different breed, I usually refuse to do
anything if I am not presented or can lay my hand on the complete derivation of the complete structure till the last detail,
at least I feel very uncomfortable when not available.

The documentation at the Jekyll project page https://jekyllrb.com/ is poor, and one is referenced to the Jekyll forum
where knowledge is passed down from people who master Ruby, for me that is not enough. I am never interested
in having something actually working at first hand, and have the understanding coming much later after considerable amount of trial and error.
I tried to dive into Liquid, but parts where missing from http://liquidmarkup.org/ site, for somebody like me that does not come from a Ruby
background.

It seems like a potent tool for any project, that is, if you have the knowledge so that you can read and understand what is written,
and write your own code the gear-ratio seems to be very high, on the other hand if you don't understand Ruby and the Liquid syntax,
your going to be reduced to a begging script kiddie for a considerable amount of time.

Jekyll does not take a full submitted HTML-page it takes various kinds of non-html markup filetypes such as .textile and .markdown (or .md), that really
 don't contain any tags besides what is referred to as yaml front matter. 
Not one single complete html page, with the known standard tags can be passed into the system  unaltered.

I started up thinking that just pasting in an HTML
page from a previous course into index.html and its accompanying style.css into main.scss and modify from there, would be short-cut,
but it was the complete opposite.
index.html is designed for the contents of the body of the welcome-page, though it does not even contain the body tag.
The template that is used is default.html which is the only place where a complete minimum set of html tags can be seen.
It has the html, head and body tag and the Liquid {{content}} primitive
where content is injected from processed markup pages and html-snippets from index.html and other html-snippets that you can place
in the _include directory. For instance, you place the html-code snippet for disqus in a file where the ending is .html,
 and you link to it where it should fit, either 
in posts.html, page.html or default.html through a Liquid filter include primitive such  as for instance  {% include disqus.html %}.

You cannot just add a second html page and think that you can easliy get Jekyll to link to it in a html-navigation menu that you put in
index.html, or if you write separate nav.html for the navigation, with  the nav-tag and following navigation html structure.
It does not work that way. Jekyll takes a subset of ONE html page in its index.html, forget therefore a second complete tagged html-page,
it cannot be done, I've learned it the hard way.
You have to alter all default Liquid code to make that work, and if you do that, you've broken the Jekyll concept and are doing something else.

If one hasn't tried it, one cannot fully appreciate the difficulty in adapting an existing full tagged html file and a working css file into
 a Jekyll structure, without any previous knowledge of Ruby and Liquid, and then  trying to have Jekyll to display it accordingly
 to what one expects comparing from a run outside of Jekyll.
I tried to adapt an ordinary navigation menu code in html and css, to make it look the way it looked outside Jekyll, 
the same code did not yield the same results.
Then my happiness was nearly "complete" when understanding that Jekyll cannot take a second full tagged html-page and link to it.
 It has to be broken up in pieces, and dealt with through Ruby.
 
The Jekyll engine processes html snippets and markup and it must fit into their featured default.html which contains the template with the HTML,
 head and body tag. Every line of html-snippets must fit into that template to be presented.
 The idea is that you should only write your content in non-html markup files and that Jekyll should generate the Html, if you want
 to change something you have to  do Ruby-coding yourself or have somebody code it for you. Forget making content in HTML, because as I said Jekyll
 only takes parts of one html file, which can be broken into parts of course, and plce in different folders, wher you the refer to the parts with
 liquid include primitive.
Until you drop the idea of fitting html-snippets into Jekylls structure which only drives you to refurnish the built Liquid filters
 in post.html, page.html and default.html you will be very frustrated. 
 Very very frustrated I  realized later, that it wouldn't accept
me linking an html file through the nav menues, that I made in html and css.
 Key thing to remember is that it is designed for markup, not html. If you want nav manues, you have to search for snippet og Rubt Liquid,
 that does it. Don't try to maipulate the system through html
 Some key concepts are still illusive to me though I've put a fair amount of time into it. For instance how is
a page related to a post, what is a paginator and much more.

I don't yet have the knowledge to estimate if Jekyll would be a suitable choice for a site like amazon.com, but it seems to me that if it 
can host github and their database which could be of be considerable size, it must be able to handle a site like amazon .com.

As I've understood it, the amount of transactions a site can handle is a matter of how many SQL-servers you can have running in tandem,
and that factor is only limited by the amount of hardware one can afford.
But can it can it run multiple threads to talk to many SQL-servers, and is multi threading crucial?
Javascript on Node on the server side is coming in a big way, but that is single threaded, and referred
to as a non-blocking single threaded architecture. Advanced concepts as "promise" are talked about on youtube and forums, 
but I've haven't had time to dive into the subject,
but it seems that this promise construct allows node to handle a large number of transactions 
 by a polling scheme, but I am way out of my competence zone here and am only guessing based on rumors.
 

Lets wrap up the Jekyll question, finally.
If you can build the fairly complex Github interface on it, and handle its database and do it so fast because of its static nature, what 
is the limit? I don't see any limits. Github can de facto handle transactions between customer and database.

Depending on the level of competence of the developer, it can evidently be used for anything. I don't know Ruby, so I cannot estimate
how many lines of codes it would take to set up a Github site or an e-commerce site, but the code snippets that I've seen have been short
and compact and deliver content with few lines of code, the downside must be that the level of competence must necessarily 
be scaled inversely proportional the compactness of the code, that is if not horrendous amounts of developing time,
 are spent on user interface stuff, but on the other hand every added layer almost always reduces the flexibilty to the advanced developer.
 
 I feel that I cannot present a valuable answer because there are so many variables that at present time are unknown to me.